SQL vs NoSQL

Ideas:

SQL databases are primarily called Relational Databases (RDBMS); whereas NoSQL databases
are primarily called non-relational or distributed databases.


SQL databases define and manipulate data-based structured query language (SQL). Seeing from
a side this language is extremely powerful. SQL is one of the most versatile and widely-used
options available which makes it a safe choice, especially for great complex queries. But from
another side, it can be restrictive. SQL requires you to use predefined schemas to determine the
structure of your data before you work with it. Also, all of your data must follow the same structure.
This can require significant up-front preparation which means that a change in the structure would
be both difficult and disruptive to your whole system.


Ideas:

A NoSQL database has a dynamic schema for unstructured data. Data is stored in many ways
which means it can be document-oriented, column-oriented, graph-based, or organized as a
key-value store. This flexibility means that documents can be created without having a defined
structure first. Also, each document can have its own unique structure. The syntax varies from
database to database, and you can add fields as you go.
In almost all situations SQL databases are vertically scalable. This means that you can increase
the load on a single server by increasing things like RAM, CPU, or SSD. But on the other hand,
NoSQL databases are horizontally scalable. This means that you handle more traffic by sharding,
or adding more servers in your NoSQL database. It is similar to adding more floors to the same
building versus adding more buildings to the neighborhood. Thus NoSQL can ultimately become
larger and more powerful, making these databases the preferred choice for large or ever-changing
data sets.

SQL databases are table-based on the other hand NoSQL databases are either key-value pairs,
document-based, graph databases, or wide-column stores. This makes relational SQL databases
a better option for applications that require multi-row transactions such as an accounting system or
for legacy systems that were built for a relational structure.
SQL databases follow ACID properties (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability) whereas
the NoSQL database follows the Brewers CAP theorem (Consistency, Availability, and Partition
tolerance).



Difference between SQL and NoSQL:-

Regional database management system                     |    Non-Relational or distributed database system

1.These databases have fixed or static or predefined    |   They have a dynamic schema
schema
2.These databases are not suited for hierarchical data  |   These databases are best suited for hierarchical data storage
storage
3.These data bases are best suited for complex queries  |   These data bases or not so good for complex queries
4.Vertically scalable                                   |   Horizontally scalable
5.Follows ACID property                                 |   Follows CAP (consistency, availability, partition,tolerance)


